[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Many of the world's
ancient religious traditions
have brought valuable knowledge
forward about healing
the mind and body.
Shamini Jain was raised in
the Jain tradition in India,
a religion many of us
know very little about.
Today she's going to tell us
about Indo-Tibetan healing
practices, which have an
intriguingly different view
of how the body and soul
juxtapose to each other
and work together.
I think it's really interesting.
Meanwhile, you are into some
really exciting stuff right
now.
So before we get into the
subject, just top us off.
You're the founding director
of something pretty impressive.
>>SHAMINI JAIN: Well, thank you.
Yeah, I'm very pleased and
honored to be here, first.
Thank you, Regina.
And yeah, we're up to
some really fun things.
So I'm the founding
director of a collaborative
called The Consciousness
and Healing Initiative.
And our goal is to scale the
science and practice of healing
by bringing communities
together to really create--
and I know this is a very
buzzword these days--
a new alchemy of healing.
>>REGINA: Yes, interesting.
Because in my last
interview, we were talking
about the nature of alchemy.
And it is true.
It's really going to take the
wisdom of these traditions
plus modern science,
plus intuitives, plus,
plus, in order to
ground us in a much more
efficient way of understanding
our body-mind matrix.
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
And I think the implications,
especially today,
are just vast.
We're coming to such exciting
and such important times
that I think all
of our community
can agree that scaling healing
and the wisdom of understanding
the power of consciousness
is really just imperative.
It's imperative.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So you started out more in
the scientific realm, right?
>>JAIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: You're a
psychologist, right?
>>JAIN: That's correct.
>>REGINA: OK.
Also, you call yourself
a social entrepreneur.
And we'll find out how
these things-- and I guess
your initiative right there
explains how these two
things fold in together.
But how did the world
of material sciences
initially start letting
you down to the extent
that you've gone the
direction you have?
>>JAIN: Yeah, thank
you for that question.
So I feel that when I was
first in college at Columbia
University is when
I really realized
how fractured science is and
what a sad state of affairs
we have currently with the
separateness of perspectives
in science and the holding
onto a particular--
what I would call really a
monocultural, ethnocentric view
in science that is plaguing
medicine as we know it today.
And of course, we
know from history
that some of this happened
because of issues,
political issues
between the church
and science with Descartes,
who of course, you may know,
was actually a firm
believer in God.
But because of the
political situations
at that time, proposed
dualism, proposed rationalism.
And basically the
idea was, OK, well,
all of you religious folks get
to play in the spirit world,
and we will just focus on the
here and now natural sciences.
But we lost something, because
we lost animism in science,
and it was discredited.
And so we, in my view, have
been suffering ever since.
And I think that
wake up call for me
was when I heard
a professor say,
there's no plasticity in
the brain after age seven.
So this was in the '90s.
And I'm a student.
I knew nothing.
But I knew enough to know that
that statement seemed pretty
preposterous, especially given
that there was very little
data to base it on.
And
>>REGINA: Considering the brain
is still forming until well
into the 20s.
>>JAIN: Exactly.
And so the question
I had in my mind
was, well, how do
they know that?
How are they so sure of it?
And that's when I realized that
religion and science sometimes
are not so separate
in that there's
significant dogmatism
in science that
is causing a problem today.
And so that's
really what brought
us to begin the initiative--
to understand that there are
multiplicities in perspectives,
that it's a need for us,
at this point, to bring
together those multiplicities
of perspective if we really
want to scale healing in the way
that we need to do.
>>REGINA: And if you take
it down to a discipline,
psychoneuroimmunology
really is the discipline
you're working with here.
>>JAIN: That's correct.
It's one of the many
disciplines, of course.
It's one that I was trained in.
And I was drawn to it because
in cognitive neuroscience,
I realized very quickly,
especially in the early '90s,
that while I thought it would
be more systems oriented,
it wasn't, really.
Everyone was the brain.
I was sitting with my
professor at the time.
We had actually-- I was
just about to graduate.
And he said, you
know, I don't know
why people are still
studying things like skin
conductance in the heart.
We have the brain.
And I just thought, wow, OK.
It's a system.
It's an interconnected system.
And so psychoneuroimmunology
was, of course,
formed understanding that if we
wanted to really scale anything
in the way of
medicine and healing,
we needed to start
talking to each other.
We needed to understand how
the system is connected.
So it's been a great
basis, I think,
for starting to explore
the question of how
does energy affect us,
of course mentally,
spiritually, emotionally,
and also physically.
How does that work?
So honestly, traditional
psychoimmunologists
are still not open to
a lot of these ideas.
But within our initiative,
The Consciousness
and Healing Initiative, we
have many leading scientists
in psychoneuroimmunology,
in biophysics, in medicine,
and healers who are
all working together
to deeply explore the
nature of consciousness
for healing on all
of these levels.
So it's really quite exciting.
And we hope to just
continue to scale it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I find what's particularly
exciting about it is-- well,
this audience is
pretty well-informed.
Most of them have been reading
about these connections
for decades.
But what's interesting
is in doing it this way,
you're now bringing
the masses on board.
The potential is to bring
And that's really
where it has to happen.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
And to help, I think,
our communities.
So we understand all
of us specialize.
And I think it's unrealistic
to expect a healer
to be able to rattle off
30 scientific studies.
And yet they have
this issue where--
I'll give you a very
specific example.
I had a healer friend
write me and say,
quick, I need you to send
me all the studies that you
know about on healing
that are really top notch.
And so I sent him that.
We've actually
built an infographic
that people can really get
into that shows basically
all of the data behind
hands-off healing
so that people can share
that with their colleagues,
with their medical
professionals, or whatever.
So I sent him these papers.
And two weeks later,
I inquired with him.
And I said, so how did that go?
What did you need them?
I knew he was doing some
healing work with PTSD patients
in a clinic in the Midwest.
And he said, thank you,
thank you, thank you,
because the patients
have been saying
how useful this is for them.
But we really wanted
to scale this.
And when I was able to show
them the scientific papers,
they gave us $300,000
so that we could
scale our work more effective
and pay the healers, which
is what should happen.
>>REGINA: Right, absolutely.
And I think it's not just
for the professionals.
It's people like
our audience here,
who have understood
these things may
have different certifications
and various healing
practices and such and so forth,
but are still around the family
dinner table trying to
somehow validate what they do.
And this gets into this
whole structure that's
critical thinking in nature.
And I don't mean as
in critical thinking.
I mean as in criticizing
one another for something
we're not familiar with, that
kind of ignorance of what
we don't know.
And so it sounds like
there's an apparatus here.
Is there an apparatus here
for the average person
to tap into and get their
hands on these studies
so when they do meet with
their sister the next time,
they can say no, no, here I have
a couple of studies on this I
think you'll find interesting?
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Start bringing
a larger conversation
to every man and woman's table.
>>JAIN: Yeah, absolutely.
It's all about trying to
find a common language.
And what I've learned
in the different worlds
that I've walked is
it's really important
to understand someone's
language and then speak to it.
and yet none of us have time
to really learn a new language.
But when we put our
languages together,
that's where we can first
share, and then second,
create a new emergent language
that perhaps is more universal
that people understand.
And of course, that is often
the language of experience.
That's usually the universal
language, is experience itself.
And yet if we really want to
make sure that patients who
are suffering today from things
like chronic pain, cancer,
and other things--
if we really want to
make sure that they
have healing services in
place, the science language
is important.
And so part of our role
is to help bridge that gap
and share the
science more broadly
with communities that need it.
At the same time, we find
that it's really important
to evolve science so that it's
no longer insert healer here,
or insert meditator here.
And you come into my study,
and I tell you what to do.
We really need to
listen more deeply
to our spiritual
practitioners and our healers
and understand what they're
saying so that we can develop
better ways of studying spirit.
That's really important.
So we're up to that kind of
work in the initiative as well.
>>REGINA: That's wonderful.
Congratulations.
It's good work.
And so in general,
you're saying we
need to move away
from disease thinking,
and then that we have moved
through, or are moving through,
what you call the
Decade of the Brain
toward whole systems thinking.
Now, explain to
people what you mean
by the Decade of the Brain.
>>JAIN: Sure.
It wasn't until just
recently that everything,
as I mentioned, was
brain, brain, brain.
We got really excited about
how the brain lights up
to this and that.
That's where we were in the
'90s and even the 2000s.
And now, of course, we're
getting a little more systems
oriented, but it's still
the brain connectome,
the brain this, the brain that.
And it's just this constant
self-referential process.
So when people are
studying what are commonly
termed in mainstream science
mind-body practices, which
of course are really
mind-body-spirit practices,
it's still what can meditation
do for me, for example.
What can meditation do for my
brain, my cognition, my health?
And what the scientists
in our initiative
are really interested in is
moving from the power of me
to the power of we.
So one of our projects
is really to see
if we can replicate and extend
some of the fine work that
was done by Maharishi
International University
scientists many
years ago and say,
what happens when we come
together in collective prayer
and meditation?
There's more and more
impetus to do that.
Lots of people want to do that.
How do we synchronize
together biologically?
What kind of information
transfer is happening?
And then how can we
understand and scale that
to promote more peace in the
world and reduce violence?
But we have the
tools now, I think,
to be able to understand this
on a scientific level in ways
that we didn't a
few decades ago.
And it's important
work to be done.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
They've done some beautiful
work there at the university.
And yet it's interesting,
because a lot
of the funding, a lot
of the media and such
is going into the dysfunction
and breakdown of the brain--
primarily, in my opinion,
because the baby boomers are
starting to age, and
now Alzheimer's is
becoming an issue.
And the boomers are
the me generation,
as I was chuckling a moment ago.
So of course, holding
the purse strings,
being the me generation,
and now starting to say,
well, this is not working
out too well for my brain--
that seems to be where the
real highlight, focus, money,
studies are all going right now.
Right?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
It's always disease
process, disease pathology,
and preventing me from dying.
You look at the
singularity movement.
There's very interesting
stuff going on there,
wanting to live forever
and all of that.
But we're also at a
crisis point that I think
people understand right now.
We have a crisis in dogmatism.
We have a crisis of
my way or the highway,
and my understanding and my
truth is wider than your truth,
all of this.
And so I think many of us feel
a need to really come together
and say, let's talk
about collective truth.
Let's talk about collective
healing and the sustainability
of our planet.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And again, that requires
the younger generations
to come in and start
looking at the need
to move beyond not
just yourselves,
but the next generation, even.
And that is really, I think,
where the me generation--
the boomers-- kind of fell down.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
We always say we think
it will be wonderful
if we can unite the boomers
with the millennials, and really
all the generations.
>>REGINA: Well, you saw that--
if you take it politically,
you saw that at, say,
Bernie Sanders rallies.
You had a lot of
people in their 60s
and a lot of kids in their
20s, and the middle generations
didn't seem to be as present
at a lot of those events.
And so it is possible
they were coming together
for some progressive
potential politically.
But the same thing
has to happen in terms
of our healing and medicine.
And it's not to say
that fine work isn't
being done with a lot of these
neuroscientists and such.
There's amazing discoveries
about the brain.
So I'm not throwing
any of it out.
I just thought it was
funny after you were saying
we need to move from me to we.
>>JAIN: Yes.
Well, on that note, I will just
mention we're getting there.
So there's some really
fabulous new mainstream
work that's starting
to be done now
looking at
inter-brain synchrony,
finally, and exploring that,
and their roles of empathy,
reducing pain, cooperation.
So we're slowly,
slowly moving there.
But the job of our initiative
is to move more quickly,
to scale there more rapidly.
So we cannot wait another 50
years to place consciousness
at the center of
healing in medicine.
We have to do that now.
>>REGINA: So it
seems to me you're
getting down philosophically to
some really simple constructs,
too.
When you're looking at how these
brains synchronize together,
the notion of cooperation
versus competition
in our entire societal structure
is based on competition
up to this point, which
has to be incredibly
damaging, in a way,
to our own physical,
mental, and emotional health.
>>JAIN: Absolutely,
because we're not
operating within the full
spectrum of our consciousness.
And that is plaguing
all of the problems.
>>REGINA: And again, it's me.
>>JAIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Right?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
You know, it's interesting,
because we talk a lot
about desire and manifestation.
And I've been
considering that today.
And I know we're
going to be talking
a bit about the Jan tradition.
And I think there's
a lot of questions
sometimes around these
Vedic traditions,
Vedic-based traditions,
and the idea
that you have to
let go of desire.
And I think there's maybe
a misperception there.
>>REGINA: I agree
with you on that.
>>JAIN: It's the question of
where desire is coming from.
And we're talking about my
desire versus collective desire
versus spirit-aligned desire.
And I think what some
of the Vedic wisdom
is teaching us is that
it's not necessarily
letting go of desire as much as
it is aligning with divine will
so that you can open to
a bigger perspective,
and you realize that that little
me consciousness that you have
is really causing suffering.
And we see that now.
We see it all over the planet.
That little me consciousness is
wreaking havoc on our bodies--
>>REGINA: And the mind.
>>JAIN: And our environments.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I couldn't agree more.
There is nothing in
this universe that
would exist without some
kind of higher desire
and without some kind of
divinely ordered desire.
Everything exists through
desire and desired outcome.
It doesn't matter who the
creator of it is, right?
And so that is--
it's been something
I think that's
been maligned a bit
in our common interpretations
of ancient cultures, which
of course there's a lot
of misinterpretation that
happens there along the way.
Right?
So let's look at--
it's not Jainism?
Jan?
>>JAIN: Both are
correct, actually.
It's a dipthong.
So some people do say Jane,
and some people say Jan,
and both are correct.
>>REGINA: So you were
raised in a household that
was steeped in this tradition.
So talk a little bit
about that before we start
going into the particulars.
Because like all religions, it
has very beautiful components
and some quirky components,
and some antiquated components,
and then other factions say
yes, they are antiquated,
we're going this direction.
>>JAIN: Yes, absolutely.
And that's what
makes it a religion.
>>REGINA: That's what
So let's talk about
your household
and what that meant growing up.
>>JAIN: Sure.
So one of my
earliest memories was
going up to our
little library attic
and seeing, next
to my mom's "Cosmo"
magazines, books like "Easy
Journey to Other Planets"
and things like that.
So both were totally
unfathomable, right?
But I was always drawn to those
Jan books at an early age.
And of course, we had
practice at home too.
>>REGINA: What is practice?
>>JAIN: Jains, for example, are
taught very fundamental life
principles that I think are
really relevant to society
today.
And three of those fundamental
principles, Regina,
are Ahimsa, which
is nonviolence,
Anekantawd, which is the truth
in multiple perspectives,
and Aparigraha, which
is translated usually
as non-possession,
but can be linked
to the principle of sufficiency.
So these are the principles
that we were raised with.
And then, of course, we were
taught prayers and things
like that.
I was just surrounded by
that culture, you could say,
and a lot of books.
And I've always been an
avid reader, always a very
curious person, curious child.
And so I would start
reading those books
and start reading
about all the things
they said about the different
subtle bodies and the effects
of yoga on the parasympathetic
nervous system, this thing
that I had never even heard
of as a nine-year-old.
And it was fascinating to me.
So kind of early on, I thought,
how did they know this?
How are they mapping it all out?
Jainism really prides
itself on being scientific.
They have a whole
mapped-out metaphysics
for understanding
the nature of soul,
the nature of
consciousness, and how
that relates to
liberation, which is really
the utmost goal in Jainism.
So there is an understanding
that gods exist.
There is actually a description
of many different realms
besides the human ones--
the [NON-ENGLISH] or
the heavenly realms,
the hellish realms.
It's considered to
actually be quite a boon
to be incarnated in
human form, because it's
believed that only by being
incarnated in human form, where
you can experience both
pleasure and suffering, pleasure
and pain, can you
transcend all of that
to become fully liberated.
And so the goal is really
for full liberation,
which is a deep connection
with one's totality, divinity
of consciousness.
As the Vevic principles
would say, [NON-ENGLISH]..
>>REGINA: So in your
household, I would assume,
generally speaking,
your household
was one of peace
and open-mindedness?
Is that fair to say?
>>JAIN: Well, we're all human.
>>REGINA: Well, you
were working at it.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
Well, what was fun, really--
one of the things--
I grew up in South
Carolina, so all my friends
were Baptist Christian.
And I would go to
church with them.
And then after a while, when
the pastor started looking at me
and saying, if you don't believe
in Jesus, you're going to hell,
I realized, well,
maybe I don't need
to be going to church
with them anymore.
But yet within me
and my friends,
there was really this
mutual respect and curiosity
for each other's paths.
So we would share, and they
were very interested in Jainism
and asked me why we
didn't eat meat, why
we practice the things we did.
Why do monks and nuns
from the Jan tradition
wear a cover on their mouth?
Well, they do that because
they firmly believe
in the principles of Ahimsa.
And they have taken vows to say
I'm going to try to follow this
as much as I can.
So I'm conscious
of the organisms
that I'm breathing in and out.
And by placing a simple
thing on my mouth that's
no trouble to me, I
kill less organisms.
And so that's their choice.
And that's why you also
see some of the monastics
walking with a broom,
because they walk,
and they don't want to step
on insects, even unwittingly.
So they consciously
just make sure
that if there's
anything in their path,
they don't step on it.
Because there's a
reverence for all life.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's quite beautiful.
It's a non-theistic
religion, right?
>>JAIN: Correct.
>>REGINA: Which is interesting.
Go ahead.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
So what that means,
really, is that the belief
in the utmost divinity is
the belief in one's own soul,
in the totality
of one's own soul.
So gods are understood
to be present.
They are respected.
In fact, for what we
call the tirthankaras,
or jinas, who are--
you can think of them
as the Bodhisattvas
for Buddhism.
They are the ones who became
enlightened and stayed
in human form to teach the way
of enlightenment to others.
So for them, there is utmost
liberation, and yet a decision
to stay in human form for
the remainder of their life
and not leave the body
right away to teach that.
And this is who
Jains try to emulate.
It's more about receiving that
total liberation, understanding
that you may have help
from beings along the way,
but not necessarily
trying to get
to heaven as the
utmost result. That
may happen as a result
of karma, reincarnation.
You may incarnate in
one realm or another.
But the ultimate
goal is liberation.
>>REGINA: So let's talk about
the establishment of Jainism,
sixth century BCE,
as almost a pushback
against Orthodox
Romamism, right?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
So that was, I think, where--
>>REGINA: What was going
on at the time that
needed to be pushed back
against, in your mind?
>>JAIN: Sure.
So delving into what
we call Jan history,
there are a few things.
One is that Jainism, as it's
been described as Jainism,
it's true that it
seemed to emerge around
this time of sixth
century BCE as a result
of some disagreements.
But really, the
practice of Jainism
occurred well before that.
And people who practiced this
path were called [NON-ENGLISH]..
So there is actually
history dating
to one of the previous jinas,
whose name was Parshvanatha.
He was the 23rd tirthankara,
or as I said, jina.
Around 6th century
BC, we had Mahavir,
who was the 24th
tirthankara of our time.
He was actually a
contemporary of the Buddha,
of Buddha as we know
him, a little bit older.
And I'm sure it's likely
that they had met,
but they are not
the same person.
They're different people.
Around that time,
there was disagreement
among the people
who were practicing
this form of what we call
Jainism the Brahmins for two
main reasons.
One, the Jains believed
that you didn't
have to just be a
Brahmin to talk to God,
that you had direct
connection with your divinity
at all times, and that animal
sacrifices were not necessary.
Because of the Jan's
strong belief in Ahimsa,
they did not feel that animal
sacrifices were the way
to go for liberation.
And so that's really
where they started
to culturally separate
more from the Hindus
and define their own path.
And so that's really also
where the idea of Jan laypeople
started bearing more fruit.
Because as some who have
studied Jainism may know,
those who are monks, nuns
take very particular vows.
And among those are chastity,
non-stealing, non-possession,
non-harming, all
of these things.
So they really--
they go with nothing.
So they almost really are, in
a way, trusting in the universe
to provide things like
food when they need it.
And so it was
understood that if we
created a basis for laypeople
who weren't ready to take it
to that level, but really wanted
to incorporate these principles
in their lives, that we could
have this cooperative system.
So that's where the
established order of Jainism
started, and there are many
different sects of Jainism.
The two main ones are the
Digambras and the Svetambaras.
>>REGINA: Is one
more conservative?
>>JAIN: The Digambras
are considered
to be more conservative.
I know there's always
questions about how
are women treated in all of
these organized religions.
There are some fundamental
differences between Digambras
and Svetambaras.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I thought we'd get into
that in a little bit,
because I found that part
absolutely fascinating.
But basically, you're looking
at a path of salvation
through perfection, through the
karmic wheel of reincarnations,
right?
>>JAIN: That's correct,
yeah, and really adherence
to the principles.
So the ultimate
goal is liberation.
There are a lot of steps
towards liberation.
And I think one of the roles
of any spiritual practice
is just how to live
a good life, how
to live a life that matters, how
to live a life that is pleasing
and that helps others.
And so these
fundamental principles
of ahimsa, nonviolence, multiple
perspectives, and living
according to the
law of sufficiency
are really those
guiding principles
that of course have
an effect on karma,
on what happens
during reincarnation.
But because one follows
those principles,
there is naturally a change
in karmic flow that happens.
Because you can look at
it like a bank account.
OK, well, I've got this much bad
karma and this much good karma,
and I want to be like
this in my next life,
so I have to do this
kind of meditation.
That's kind of empty.
>>REGINA: Well, just
starting with do no harm.
And that's a really
good starting place
in any incarnation, right?
>>JAIN: Right, yeah.
>>REGINA: So as
natural vegetarians,
how did the more conservative
or the more strict sects
of Jainism work with the whole
notion that plants have souls,
animals have souls, yet you
have to have sustenance.
And so you are going
to obviously eat
from the plant kingdom.
How does that work out on
a spiritual soul level?
>>JAIN: Sure.
And plants have consciousness.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
So if you're not
breathing bacteria,
for example, how does that work?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
So the Jains do believe in
consciousness in all matter,
really.
They believe that
souls exist everywhere.
There are souls running
through this table
right now, according to Jainism.
But they also believe in
the hierarchy of the senses.
That is, how much do we
feel particular things
like pain and suffering?
And so with Jains, they
believe that animals and humans
and plants and rocks
have consciousness.
But animals suffer more
from pain than plants do.
>>REGINA: Have a different
type of nervous system
that's more highly
developed, right?
>>JAIN: Exactly.
And so they suffer more from
the ramifications of killing,
for example, than
certain plants do.
Very strict Jains
will actually not
eat things that
grow underground.
And most people think
that's because when
you pull the plant out
of the Earth, it's gone.
Like you pull a carrot out,
there is no more carrot.
The carrot doesn't grow back.
>>REGINA: Kind of
like fruitarians.
>>JAIN: Right, similar to that.
So a lot of them don't eat
onions, don't eat garlic,
don't eat potatoes.
There are other reasons, too,
igniting the passions of--
they say there are multiple
souls in things like garlic
and onion, for example,
which is interesting thinking
of the different layers.
But they do firmly believe in
the hierarchy of the senses.
So during our holy days,
which we call [NON-ENGLISH],,
for example, where the laypeople
try to emulate more of the life
of a monk, it's said not to
eat even green leafy vegetables
because there are so many
different insects and other
organisms that subsist on
those that could get hurt
in the process.
So they do-- they kind
of take it to that level.
And there is a reason why
people don't hear about Jainism.
It's not a
proselytizing religion.
It's not one that people
try to convert to.
It's pretty strict.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Extreme asceticism
at times, right?
>>JAIN: It can seem that
way, especially in the West.
There's not a focus on flogging
oneself or anything like that.
But everything is done--
these things that seem
very aesthetic to us,
they're really just practices
to bring us closer to our souls.
They're really just
practices to help
us recognize when we're in
that attachment aversion
paradox that sometimes
plagues our lives.
And so that's really the point.
>>REGINA: And so
with this religion,
because it is reliant
upon the soul,
it's interesting
when you look at what
is this wheel that we see that
has the concentric circles
of our being.
What do you call this wheel?
>>JAIN: Yeah, it's-- you
know, I don't know if it has
a particular name.
I call it the Wheel
of Understanding.
>>REGINA: The Wheel
But interestingly, in a lot
of different understanding
spiritual traditions, you
would have the physical,
the mental, the emotional.
It goes out, and ultimately,
you have the soul
as this more nebulous outer
ring of the concentric circle.
This has the soul
at the center of it.
And so ultimately, that
is who you answer to,
who you are responsible to
and for the development of.
Right?
>>JAIN: That's
absolutely correct.
The soul is really your essence.
The soul is your true
essence, your pure essence.
And I love this
model, and I'd love
to try to break it
down a little bit.
So if we think about our
ultimate being, our true being,
it's really the soul.
And what is the soul?
The soul is pure light.
It's pure consciousness.
We come into embodied
form in the soul.
And so certain aspects of
the light and consciousness
in our soul are obscured
by what we call karma.
Well, what is karma?
A lot of people have
definitions of karma.
I think of karma as the
result of our thoughts, words,
and deeds.
And so in the Jan tradition,
it's understood that karma--
and this is where it differs
from many sects of Buddhism--
karma is considered real.
Karma is considered actually--
>>REGINA: It's like a
subtle matter, right?
>>JAIN: Very subtle matter.
>>REGINA: That's fascinating.
Explain this more to us.
>>JAIN: So the way
karma interacts
with the soul is literally to
form almost a sheath around it.
You can think of a cloud
surrounding a soul that
is a dynamic cloud,
and it's really
being fed by everything you're
thinking, doing, and feeling.
So the light of
the soul is really
being filtered through
this karmic body.
We call it the [NON-ENGLISH],,
or the karmic body.
And so that filtering
light is actually
what gives rise to all of these
other aspects that are more
gross that begin to
push into the physical.
So that's actually where
the bioenergetic body,
what we call in Western science
the biofield, comes about.
It's a direct result of the
interaction of your soul
with the karmic sheath.
That forms what we in Jainism
call the [NON-ENGLISH],,
or kind of like the
electric or fiery body.
In Vedic traditions, it's
called the [NON-ENGLISH]..
The biofield is
essentially that interface
between the soul and
the physical body.
So you have this filtering
of light through karma
which is then carried out by
the biofield, which gives rise
to thoughts, gives
rise to emotions,
gives rise even to our
physical attributes,
our physical bodies, our selves.
And so it's the emanations
of soul consciousness
through these sheets,
through these bodies
that really help us
understand the nature
of our consciousness, where
our consciousness is at.
And it's completely dynamic.
And karma is not the
absence of free will.
In fact, karma just basically
reflects your actions,
your thoughts.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
So it's really fascinating.
And as scientists, we're
really just wanting to dive
more deeply into this connection
between the soul and the body
and all of these
different aspects.
>>REGINA: And we're going to
get into the specific lineage
of healing and how that works.
I found some of it fascinating
and some of it kind of quirky.
And it would seem
antiquated, but maybe
you can explain the actual
principles behind it--
for example, the notion
that just in being feminine,
it's already creating an
inequality spiritually
with men, with the
masculine, for example.
>>JAIN: That is really coming
from the Digambra tradition,
which we mentioned is--
you can say more of
the fundamentalist type
of tradition of Jainism.
And this is the
thing with religion.
It's interesting.
So it's not unlike
Christianity, where
you have different sects that
believe in different things.
And they're all filtering
the truth in their own way.
All religion is fraught
with cultural issues.
And we've seen those play a
role in so many different forms
of religion.
So the Digambras
believed that only men
could become liberated, and
you had to be in male form.
Now, this is very
curious, because actually,
one of the tirthankaras--
I mentioned there
are 24 of them.
So they're like 24 jinas,
who are like the bodhisattvas
for Buddhism.
One of them was female.
The 19th tirthankara was
actually named Mallinatha.
And there is actually
historical evidence
that suggests that she was
a female, because they have
excavated idols, for
example, from 15 years ago
that show very clearly she
had braids, she had breaths.
And yet the Digambras
hold that she wasn't
a female, that she was a male.
So that's one sect.
And then the other
one, Svetambaras Jains,
which I'm a part of-- and there
are many different sub-sects
between them--
they don't believe that.
And actually,
Mahavira, who again
was considered the
modern founder of Jainism
in the sixth century
BCE, was actually
known as a liberator of women.
Because he was
the one that said,
actually, that's not true.
Women can attain liberation.
Women are equal to men, and
they are embodied human form,
and there's no reason why they
can't attain enlightenment.
But there is some
confusion around that.
>>REGINA: There is.
And it's fascinating,
because you
look at the psychology behind
it and say, well, first of all,
being able to be naked
in front of the world,
in front of yourself, the
soul, and so forth, and express
yourself, is--
it's not an undesirable thing to
do, to attain this liberation,
to be able to be
naked in the world.
And yet if a woman is
naked in the world,
it can tempt the man, who is
on his path of purification.
And so--
>>JAIN: And then
there's this projection
that the woman is evil.
>>REGINA: Then there's
this projection
that the woman is evil, so
that's one of the reasons.
>>JAIN: Yeah, that's
one of the reasons.
And it plagues, I think,
many societies, certainly
the Vedic society.
I'll just share with
you an anecdote.
My husband, who is an Indian
man like me, born and raised
in the States,
was very connected
to Vivekananda
and his teachings.
And so I knew that he
was very connected to it.
So when we were
married, I picked up
one of Vivekananda's books.
He has a whole set of them.
I just opened to something
and started reading it.
And it was the woman
this, the woman that,
like totally disparaging, almost
like the woman who was evil.
And I was like, what is this?
And so I had a discussion
with him about it.
And he said, well,
that was the culture
that he was coming from.
And I said, that's
fine, but he's
supposed to be enlightened.
So how does that work?
And so we see this plaguing
and this suppression
of feminine wisdom and this
projection of impulse control
issues onto the woman
all over society today.
Now we see this kind of uprising
in our society, of course,
of the Me Too movement
and other things.
I believe we're seeing an
uprising in that movement
in science today, too.
And that's really where the
study of the biofield comes in.
Because if you think about what
that is, it's the vital bodies.
So in the Vedic traditions,
there's an understanding
that divine union of
the male and female
are Shakti and Shiva, Shakti
being the divine female force,
the energy, the vitalism that
runs through the body that
meets the wisdom that is
inherent to really create
utmost consciousness and bliss.
And so what have we done?
We've taken the divine
feminine out of everything,
including science.
And so we don't have wisdom.
We just accumulate knowledge.
>>REGINA: Oh, I couldn't
agree with you more on that.
So in other words,
women do not have
to incarnate as male
first before they
can attain their liberation.
>>JAIN: No.
That's only in the
Digambara sect.
So that's definitely
hotly debated among Jains.
And I would say all of
the Svetambara sects--
and there are
about five of them,
I think, or something--
don't believe that.
They do believe that women
can absolutely be liberated.
And one of our
tirthankaras was a woman.
>>REGINA: What you were just
talking about a moment ago,
even in the world of science,
the smearing of the two--
I was speaking at a conference
a few ago, several months ago
now.
And at the very end, they had
each of the speakers on stage.
We were all in a panel together.
And they were each
to make a statement
or answer a question
from the audience.
And one of the things--
I made a statement.
And it was so
interesting to watch.
Because I said, until
we marry the intuitive
and the native
wisdom of our ability
to bring through information
from other realms
with this wonderful scientific
knowledge in the world
of material sciences--
until we marry them,
we're not going to
make any fast track
to any of these
major discoveries
that this conference
is all about.
>>JAIN: That's great.
>>REGINA: And actually, I have
to say the men were really--
they were all scientists.
The men were very uncomfortable
with it, mostly arms folded.
Audience loved it.
They were like yes.
They were applauding.
Because they could
understand it's true.
The time has come
to be able to--
and we could go down
many tracks with this,
but to bring that
feminine aspect of being,
which is the part that can very
easily detach from the material
world and bring knowledge
in from other areas.
Men and women can do it.
It's just the feminine
receptive aspect of being.
Until we're fully charging
that up and using it
alongside science,
we aren't going
to make a lot of progress.
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Too slow.
>>JAIN: Exactly.
It's too slow.
So I study with-- my teacher
is Reverend Rosalyn Bruyere.
And so she is part of our
scientific advisory council,
actually, among many
healers who are also
part of our
collaborative, I think,
who have been on your show,
Tiffany Barsotti, Eileen
McKusick, and others.
So one of the things that
Rosalyn remarked about
that she loves with getting
together with other scientists
is that our biofields--
they merge.
So our biofields merge.
And so she gets to gain that
analytical understanding
that they have, and they get
to expand their consciousness
and worldview in a way that's
more receptive to getting
answers that are not just
from their thinking mind.
So one of the things
that we're doing,
actually, is we're taking
a delegation of scientists
to India this year
to sit with some
of the great spiritual
teachers and leaders
and really go to their
space, go to their church.
So again, instead of
bringing them here
and coming to the university
and all that-- that's great.
They're happy to do it.
As you know, many of
these spiritual leaders
love to meet with scientists.
But I think it's also
important that we go there,
that we feel the vibrations of
their ashrams, their devotees,
their experience, and open
ourselves to the nonlinearity
that exists-- of course,
as you know in India,
it's very nonlinear there--
so that we can ask
better questions.
>>REGINA: I agree.
So let's go into
the actual tenants
of Indo-Tibetan healing.
What does that mean, and what
are the tenants of healing,
and how does it differ?
If you have this chart where
the soul is essentially
at the center, I would assume
that the process of healing
is different.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
Well, and it begs the question
of what is healing, actually.
What is it?
Everybody has a
different definition.
And I think all of us--
>>REGINA: Balancing
out imbalances.
>>JAIN: Right, exactly.
I think everyone, probably,
who is watching agrees
that healing is not caring.
So sometimes you have to
do a lot of clarification
on that for our
medical audiences
and scientific audiences.
It's not about just getting
rid of a disease or getting rid
of something that's in me
that I don't want anymore.
That might happen.
That might not happen.
for me, healing is bringing
one closer to their own soul
and their soul nature.
And I believe that
is what is reflected
in these Indic practices.
So going back to that
framework of the soul
really being the
ultimate goal, if we
are in harmony with
our soul's actions
and our soul's manifestation
in physical form,
then we understand that
we are vibratory, alive,
dynamic beings that
are interacting
with the world in all
of these different ways.
Now, from the Indic traditions,
there is speaking of elements.
And in the different traditions,
it's kind of different.
But essentially, we
are all comprised--
everything in nature,
including ourselves, are
comprised of these elements.
In our tradition, it's space,
earth, water, fire, and air.
So we all have this
unique cosmic blueprint.
That's essentially what it is.
It's based on karma.
It's based on what we've done
before in previous lives, what
we're up to now, what
our sole purpose is.
We've been constructed in a
way to carry out our purpose.
And our constitution
really reflects that.
So healing is really about
getting us to be back
to our best vibratory selves.
And so healing for me might look
different from healing for you.
The commonality is that
it's bringing us back
to our soul nature and
our soul in physical form.
I think sometimes, again,
with the plaguing of dualism
that we have-- and
honestly, in some ways,
Jainism also dualistic
in the way it describes
the soul and the body.
We're learning more and
more that the power that we
have here as embodied souls on
this Earth to affect healing
requires us to be fully awake
and present in our bodies
spiritually.
And this is where I see
an evolution happening
in some of the ways
that we're interpreting
some of these texts.
So maybe you and some of
your viewers, for example,
have heard of Sri
Aurobindo and the mother.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Absolutely brilliant,
brilliant man, brilliant woman.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
And the mother
appeared very clear
in her speaking and
her writing that--
and this is completely aligned
with Jan wisdom, Vedic wisdom--
that consciousness is all the
way down to the cellular level.
Our cells are conscious.
And so we have the potential at
this point of not just checking
out to go get wisdom,
go somewhere else,
or just leave somewhere
else, and liberate.
Certainly we can
follow that model.
But if we choose that we don't
want to do that at this point,
we also have the capacity
to bring forth wisdom
to provide heaven on Earth.
We have that capability to
provide heaven on Earth,
to bring healing in
through ourselves,
outside of ourselves, to bring
greater light to everything
that is manifest on this Earth.
>>REGINA: And so that
has to do with working
with these elemental
energies, bringing them
from a more gross level to a
finer and finer state, right?
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
And that's part of
the healing process.
And that's not relegated to
Indo-Tibetan practices at all.
That's in native practices.
It's in all of these
different practices.
And Rosalyn has
certainly taught me
a lot about how to feel
the subtle elements
and how to utilize
those for healing.
So very specific ways
that you can do that.
But the first part, I'd
say, is just to tune
in to one's own sensation.
Notice what's there.
And of course, we
know that elements
are related to
chakras, and there
are different models for that.
But for example, if one is
feeling emotionally depleted,
Rosalyn is fond of saying
the solution to pollution
is dilution.
Bring water into
the second chakra.
Help flush it.
Help clear it.
The first chakra in the
Vedic model is earth.
In Rosalyn's model, it's fire.
You can see how it's both.
Grounding, connecting
with the earth
is vitally important for us.
If we're really going
to be able to bring
the spiritual all the way
down into the physical
into our bodies
and on the Earth,
we can utilize the power
of these elements subtly
to do that.
And it's a really fun process.
>>REGINA: And
there's another part.
One of the notes
I made here-- it's
the interaction of
our environment,
any subtle energies, is creating
psychological reactions, right?
That's part of it.
And the ones that
are mentioned here
are attachment, aversion,
and indifference,
which is also attraction and
repulsion and essentially
indifference, right?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
And so that's really the flow
of energy through our egos.
It's just really our
ego conditioning.
>>REGINA: And that's really
where a lot of people
get hung up, so
let's talk about it.
Life, all of life, is based
on attraction and repulsion.
That's the nature of
the universe itself.
>>JAIN: Well, it can be, sure.
That is the nature
of the universe.
>>REGINA: Just on
an atomic level.
>>JAIN: Yes, that's true.
It's the law of
cause and effect.
That's the duality that
we live in, absolutely.
And I think the skill that
a lot of these religious and
spiritual traditions
are trying to help us
with is the ability
to observe that
without getting caught into it.
So we're human beings.
We want for things.
We avoid certain things.
But is there a way that
we can lean into that
and actually observe
that wanting, observe
that repulsion in a way that
we're not consumed by it?
Because it's when we
get consumed by it
that we run into problems.
It's when I'm so
attached to something
that I can't see
everything else around me.
>>REGINA: Either way creates a
lot of resistance in our lives.
Whether something is being
taken away or foisted upon us,
there's resistance either way
if we have too strong a vantage
point or a viewpoint, right?
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
And essentially, what that does
is those strong attachments
and aversions create
karma-- again,
going back to that
karmic sheath,
you're literally creating
more subtle matter that
obscures the light of the soul.
So yes, attachment and
aversion are part of life.
But the trick is--
there's a trick.
The trick is really to
watch it so that you're not
attached to your
attachment, you're
not attached to your aversion.
Does that make sense?
So then the light of the soul
is able to shine through more
clearly and guide you
on your purpose in life.
>>REGINA: It seems to me
actually quite simple in that
if you are able to listen
to these subtle feelings--
as I call them, the
whisperings of the soul--
that you tread through
life a little more lightly.
And you allow yourself, whether
it's your preference or not
in the moment, to
be guided where
you need to go in that moment.
And that is where
a lot of people,
especially in a very
willful world, get hung up.
Once a desire is created
for a specific outcome,
then comes the attachment.
And sometimes we're
doing it because we
think we're supposed to, because
there's some societal pressure
to do it.
It doesn't matter if
it's driven by that
or just garden variety
attractions and repulsions.
But to me, if you can't just
listen and respond accordingly,
life becomes nothing
but resistance.
So how can you avoid building
up more of this subtle matter
called karma?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
I think a key thing is really
widening our perspectives.
We live in an increasingly
self-referential world.
We have our social media.
We have all of these things.
And now we get self-referential
about our purpose.
Oh, my god, what's my purpose?
What's my purpose?
>>REGINA: It's really
getting boring.
>>JAIN: Yeah, it can
get really boring,
because it's lonely too.
So when we widen our
perspective while doing
these kinds of
spiritual practices
that connect us both to
spirit and with each other,
we widen our lens.
We don't take
things as seriously.
We're able to watch and
observe, and like you said,
be light with the process,
have fun with the process,
and let go of our rigidity.
That's really important.
>>REGINA: One time a being that
I'm closely associated with
that I chat with
from time to time--
the being was saying that
the conscious mind as we
know it, the animal portion
of the conscious mind,
they say it was initially
only there to keep you
from bumping into things.
It wasn't the part that
was taken over, dominated,
making your life decisions
for you now to the point where
essentially, you can't even
hear the real mind, which
is the whispering of the soul.
And so I assume that part of
the practice, the practice
element of the
Jan tradition, has
to be removing the
noise so that you
can hear the soul or the higher
mind speak through to you.
Is that correct?
>>JAIN: Absolutely, yeah.
>>REGINA: And then get this
lower mind that's chatting
away, telling us what we
should and shouldn't do,
and holds shame-- that's
subconscious-- but nonetheless,
all of this baggage with it--
it really has to
take a backseat.
That is what's causing
the problem in us.
And yet we all have
to deal with it.
>>JAIN: Yeah, it's really true.
And these tried and true
spiritual practices really
help us to filter
out that mind noise
to clarify a direct channel
with our spirit guides,
with our souls.
And so in the Jan
tradition, that's
generally taken in the
form of mantra meditations.
So we have a lot
of mantric prayers
that we do that help to
stabilize the energy field.
There are color
meditations as well
to bring in color into the
body, again with verbalizations
of mantras to do that.
So there's definitely
that tradition,
very similar to
Vedic traditions,
the traditions of really
getting into the body
and relaxing every
single part of the body.
Because we understand
that all the impulses that
are going on here are
mental emotional, basically.
Everything that's happening
is here reflected in the body.
And so by getting
the body quiet,
we help get the mind quiet,
and we allow for spirit
to come more fully
present in our bodies.
And these are universal.
I just had the beauty of
sitting with a Chilean healer.
It was just amazing.
It was this past week.
And there's so many
similarities in all
of these indigenous approaches
and Christian approaches,
all of these different--
Judaism, even, I would
say to a degree, probably
Islam and others--
there's always a reminder to
refocus back on sensation,
to anchor back into the body.
And so as we start doing
that, for if we're just
learning about it, we start
feeling the sensations
associated with our emotions.
And then we start learning
about the thoughts that are
associated with those emotions.
And then once we've
cleared the bubbling river,
and we're getting more
to lake level, stillness
of the ripples of
sensation in our body,
then we get into the
more subtle aspects.
And the subtle sensations
give us spiritual messages.
>>REGINA: So once
we begin to quiet it
all down so we can
actually listen,
one of the things that
pops up is trauma.
And we have to somehow
interface with that trauma.
And this is something
in Tiffany's work,
Eileen McKusick's work.
When she's using
her tuning processes
to go through the subtle
layers of our history,
you keep hitting trauma,
disturbances in the field,
another disturbance
in the field.
And then on the other
side of the body,
she looks at how this is
expressed out in our behavior
at this point in time
and into the future.
It's fascinating.
So looking at it from
that point of view,
how is trauma worked with?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
It's very similar to these
other healing approaches
in that as you clarify
the light of the soul,
you gain the power to release
those karmic patterns that
stay in the biofield and keep
that trauma pattern running.
So if there is a karmic
trace of that trauma, which
often there is--
trauma runs deep.
It's usually felt
on a karmic level.
As we go through the processes
of spiritual awakening,
spiritual liberation,
a lot of those traumas
will come to light
when they seek
help with them, like going
to a healer, for example,
or going to a
spiritual practitioner,
or going to friends,
sharing what's
coming up for me right now.
It could be past life trauma.
It could be a lot
of different things.
By clarifying the
light of the soul,
we're able to release
those patterns.
And once we release those
patterns on the karmic level,
they no longer plague
our mind and our emotions
and our behaviors in the
way that they had before.
But sometimes, as you know,
when you do deep work,
you don't even know
it's going to come up.
And all of a sudden,
there's a trauma
that comes up that you
weren't even aware of before.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
And it can come up in layers.
And so when I think of the
trauma that's carried forward
in this lifetime and from other
lifetimes, in my vernacular,
that would be contained within
what we call the subconscious.
So how does the word
"karma" and this karmic body
interface with the notion,
or maybe the Western notion,
of the subconscious mind?
>>JAIN: Yeah.
Well, recall that we talked
about these emanations
of karma.
In the Jan tradition, they
describe them as twofold.
One is psychical, meaning
the mind and emotions,
and one is physical.
So we can see how the
emanations of consciousness
and our conscious experience get
lodged into our bodies as well
as our mind and emotions.
So that is the adivasi,
or the karmic emanations
that spring forth.
Those are not always conscious.
But what I've noticed--
and likely, I think, all
healers and practitioners
have noticed-- is
that even when they're
lodged in the subconscious, they
play a role in our behavior.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
They're driving
behavior unconsciously.
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
So we just simply start
looking at our behavior
patterns, especially the things
that aren't working for us
and things that are causing
us pain and suffering,
and we say what
is going on here.
Why is this pattern continuing
to come forth in my life?
And how can I look
deeply into that?
And maybe we don't
know the origin of it.
There are some
healers, including
Rosalyn, who believe that you
don't have to know everything
>>REGINA: That's what I
was going to ask next.
That's interesting.
So let's talk about that--
we have a little bit of time
here--
about the two different
schools of thought.
You have to get to it.
You have to relive it.
You get in the pain,
and boom, that's
going to somehow
disperse it, right?
Not necessarily.
>>JAIN: No.
In fact, there is an
understanding among many of us
that if a healer--
let's say if a healer does not
know how to skillfully remove
a trauma at the
karmic level, they
may actually just basically--
>>REGINA: Re-traumatized.
>>JAIN: Yeah, you just amplified
the traumatic pattern, which
might serve if someone
really needs to wake up
to their traumatic
pattern, but it may cause
a lot of suffering as well.
So I personally think--
this is on a case-by-case basis.
For me, one of the
most important things
that I've learned
personally in working
with trauma with patients
with PTSD and others
is that you create a container.
Creating a container for
me has worked really well.
So you really create
a space of light
that allows that karmic
trace to release.
And those of us who have helped
people release their trauma
have seen that.
There's a flash, and it comes
often with a flash of insight.
It comes with an energetic
feeling of something
leaving the body.
But if you're trying to
dig in there and get it--
it's kind of like you're--
>>REGINA: Give it a
name, give it a face.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
I don't know that it's always
so helpful, unless the person is
coming where they're present and
they need to talk it through.
And we see this a lot, even
in chronic pain-- for example,
a lot of work I've
done with veterans.
Of course they
always send veterans
to the psychologist when they're
using up too many services,
and they're trying to get
them to utilize less services,
so they send them to the
psychologist instead.
And you can see
how they're stuck
in their narrative of trauma
that's not necessarily
helping them move forward.
>>REGINA: Are you able to, in
that practice with veterans,
utilize some of your more
ancient and mystical knowledge
to work with them?
>>JAIN: Yeah, of course.
>>REGINA: Or do you
have to do it covertly?
>>JAIN: So I'll share with
you on a personal level,
I never sat for my licensure.
And I did that on
purpose-- because I
didn't want to be
constrained and feel
like, as a clinical
psychologist,
I'm not allowed to touch people.
And quite frankly, most
of my full-time work
is really being done in the
Consciousness and Healing
Initiative and directing that.
But when I work with someone who
has trauma like this, generally
speaking, it D depending
on what their openness is,
we may talk about it.
But it's, as you know,
kind of a felt thing.
Their guides come in.
My guides come in.
I may intend to just hold
them in a pillar of light.
And that has worked really well.
You think about-- I don't
want to digress too much,
but you think about
the work of Carl Rogers
and that famous,
famous session he
had where he sat in
silence with his patient,
and this patient had an
enormous breakthrough.
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
>>JAIN: And the psychologists
were like, what happened?
And the healers understand
it all too well.
>>REGINA: Well,
years ago, I used
to do just a little clinical
hypnotherapy practice I had.
And I was not a psychologist.
I just understood the
skill set and went
through that kind
of certification.
You can do it in months.
It's not a big deal right.
Psychologists will say,
oh, my god, don't do that.
But I always found it
was quite interesting.
I had some good success with
people doing this in the day.
And one thing I found
that was not taught--
and I can't say that my
instructor particularly
frowned on it, but
they didn't understand
it-- was that I started
doing silent sessions,
connecting with people in
their ideomotor response
silently, mind to mind.
And as long as there was
an environment of trust,
you could do this easily.
And had sometimes some really
profound transformations,
especially when I was
working with someone where
it was performance-oriented.
I would get an agreement
with them, mind to mind,
and they would just boom,
pop up in the competition
and not know what they had
done or been working on.
But I find that that's
actually a very powerful way
to work because it bypasses
all resistance-- the resistance
of all words, all
concepts, all ego.
There's nothing there--
>>JAIN: Holding space.
>>REGINA: Except a pure holding
space for another person.
It was very effective.
>>JAIN: That's wonderful.
There's one other thing
that comes to mind since
we're talking about how to work
with trauma that we've learned
from Rosalyn and that many
healers are using today with
their work in with
PTSD patients,
and that is actually
rooted in Vedic tradition--
it's probably other
traditions as well,
I think Egyptian
traditions and others--
called unwinding.
And this is understood to really
help release patterns that
again are on the karmic level.
So what it might look like is,
for example, a patient laying
on the table-- not
always, but can
look like this, where you have
your hands around their head.
And again, you're holding space.
And their bodies start
to move a little bit.
Their head starts to move.
And you can feel the
pattern releasing.
There are meditations that one
can do, unwinding meditations,
that are just good
because we all
get wound up in our little
patterns and things like that.
So this is a really
easy self-care practice
where one sits in meditation.
And it allows the body
to move freely in the way
that it wants to release those
patterns that are winding us
up.
>>REGINA: OK.
So be specific.
Is that all there is to it?
You sit quietly.
You're feeling wound up.
You sit quietly,
and you just allow
the body, of its
own intelligence,
to begin moving you,
just subtle movement?
>>JAIN: I would add--
I always think this
is a good practice,
especially in this day and age
-- make sure you're grounded.
So sit down, stand up, whatever.
Sitting is easier.
>>REGINA: Breathe.
>>JAIN: Breathe, feel
the base of your spine,
feel your feet on the ground,
feel your legs connect
with the earth, feel
supported by the earth,
support yourself, and send
support back down to the earth
so you really have that firm
connection with the earth.
>>REGINA: And then let
the movement just--
>>JAIN: And then let
the movement begin.
So that way you don't get dizzy
or feel a little lightheaded
or something like that.
You're really grounded.
And this process
can be five minutes.
It can be 45 minutes.
I think Rosalyn and
Ken recommend doing it
about twice a week if you can.
I found it to be very helpful.
>>REGINA: I've done
it just spontaneously
off and on throughout my life.
I didn't know exactly
what was going on,
except I assumed it was
working through something.
I find it very
natural and beautiful.
Give us maybe-- we just have
a couple of minutes left--
maybe one little Jain meditation
or a prayer, or something
universal that we can work with.
>>JAIN: I'd love to do that.
Thank you.
So I'll share with you
a Jan universal prayer,
and I'll explain a
little bit of the meaning
before I say the words, which
of course are in Sanskrit.
So the prayer is a universal
prayer for everyone.
As I mentioned, Jainism doesn't
believe in a creator god.
This is really a
universal prayer
to all beings who have
attained enlightenment
or are teaching the
path of enlightenment
and giving reverence to them.
So the prayer starts--
I'll first say it,
and then if it's OK,
I'll just sing it, because
that's how we usually do it.
So the prayer is Namo
arihantanam which means I bow
to all the [NON-ENGLISH],, those
who have conquered themselves,
those who have stayed to teach
the way of enlightenment.
[NON-ENGLISH].
I bow to all those who have
attained enlightenment.
[NON-ENGLISH].
I bow to all heads of
congregations that are holding
space for this learning.
[NON-ENGLISH].
I bow, again, to some of the
major monks and nuns that
are teaching the way.
[NON-ENGLISH] I bow to all
teachers of spirituality.
[NON-ENGLISH].
By bowing to these five
beings, [NON-ENGLISH],,
may all darkness be removed.
[NON-ENGLISH] basically
means this is a very revered,
ancient prayer.
So we will sing it now,
or I'll sing it for you.
I sing this to my
kids every night.
You'll love it.
[SINGING]
[NON-ENGLISH]
May all beings have peace.
>>REGINA: That's very beautiful.
And I'm sure your children will
sing that to their children.
>>JAIN: Thank you.
>>REGINA: On that note,
thank you so much, Shamini.
>>JAIN: Thank you, Regina.
It's my honor.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: To learn more
about Shamini and her work,
you can go to chi.is.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."